content/en/resume/_index.md, before:

---
description: Professional summary of all the good stuff employers want to know.
featured_image: /images/dice.jpg
title: 'Resume'
---

Experience
---------

**Data Scientist at Spectrum Health**, August 2019 - Present

* Forecasted COVID-19 bed utilization to indicate potential infection surge and presented results to executive leadership -- example [here](https://rpubs.com/amanda_park/SH_Surge_Model)
* Found most important symptoms for COVID-19 positive patients with a using logistic regression, which improved safety measures
* Developed unsupervised machine learning algorithm to improve management of high-cost healthcare populations and presented at HDAA 2020 Conference 
* Used Natural Language Processing algorithms such as sentiment analysis and topic modelling to analyze hospital surveys and automate a previously manual labelling process
* Developed financial compensation benchmarks for executives using time series analysis

**Data Science Consultant at Internet Leads US**, April 2018 - August 2019

* Used A/B testing on website landing pages for a client, improving the rate of ad revenue by 10%
* Forecasted future predicted ad revenue with 95% accuracy, allowing for ad-hoc decision making
* Used predictive analytics and regression analysis to identify variables resulting in a 15% decrease in cost per lead

**Board President at YOUTH POWER!**, February 2017 - August 2019

**Board Secretary at YOUTH POWER!**, November 2014 - February 2017

* Led a Board of 6 to 20 participating youth and young adults and facilitated regular meetings
* Developed a strategic plan and updated priority agenda to assist the organization in growing by 20%

Skills
---------
**Programming Languages**: R, Python, Tableau, SQL, Java

**Technical Skills**: Data Science, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Data Visualization, Regression Analysis, Git, Excel

**Soft Skills**: Problem Solving, Communication, Leadership, Writing, Open-Mindedness, Logical Thinking

Education
---------

**MA in Statistics**; Binghamton University; 3.7 GPA; May 2019

**BS in Mathematics With Minor in Economics**; SUNY Cortland; 4.1 GPA; May 2017

Commit message:

Adjust Page Titles and Images

content/en/resume/_index.md, after:

---
description: Summary of my professional experience, education, and skills.
featured_image: ''
title: 'Resume'
---

Experience
---------

**Data Scientist at Spectrum Health**, August 2019 - Present

* Forecasted COVID-19 bed utilization to indicate potential infection surge and presented results to executive leadership -- example [here](https://rpubs.com/amanda_park/SH_Surge_Model)
* Found most important symptoms for COVID-19 positive patients with a using logistic regression, which improved safety measures
* Developed unsupervised machine learning algorithm to improve management of high-cost healthcare populations and presented at HDAA 2020 Conference 
* Used Natural Language Processing algorithms such as sentiment analysis and topic modelling to analyze hospital surveys and automate a previously manual labelling process
* Developed financial compensation benchmarks for executives using time series analysis

**Data Science Consultant at Internet Leads US**, April 2018 - August 2019

* Used A/B testing on website landing pages for a client, improving the rate of ad revenue by 10%
* Forecasted future predicted ad revenue with 95% accuracy, allowing for ad-hoc decision making
* Used predictive analytics and regression analysis to identify variables resulting in a 15% decrease in cost per lead

**Board President at YOUTH POWER!**, February 2017 - August 2019

**Board Secretary at YOUTH POWER!**, November 2014 - February 2017

* Led a Board of 6 to 20 participating youth and young adults and facilitated regular meetings
* Developed a strategic plan and updated priority agenda to assist the organization in growing by 20%

Skills
---------
**Programming Languages**: R, Python, Tableau, SQL, Java

**Technical Skills**: Data Science, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Data Visualization, Regression Analysis, Git, Excel

**Soft Skills**: Problem Solving, Communication, Leadership, Writing, Open-Mindedness, Logical Thinking

Education
---------

**MA in Statistics**; Binghamton University; 3.7 GPA; May 2019

**BS in Mathematics With Minor in Economics**; SUNY Cortland; 4.1 GPA; May 2017
